beating yourself up will not make you do
the work to get healthy
and tearing yourself down over the [__]
that you've done or the terrible
relationships that you're in it's not
going to empower you to change the
patterns that are keeping you stuck
what i've come to realize and what we'll
talk a lot about today is that the way
that our minds are designed
is our minds are designed to stop you
at all costs from doing anything
that might
hurt you
and the way that that that that this all
happens is it all starts with something
super subtle
that none of us ever catch
and that is with this habit that all of
us have that nobody's talking about
we all have a habit
of hesitating
we have an idea
you're sitting in a meeting
you have this incredible idea and
instead of just
you know saying it
you stop and you hesitate
now what none of us realize is that when
you hesitate just that moment that micro
moment that small hesitation it sends a
stress signal to your brain
it wakes your brain up and your brain
all of a sudden goes oh wait a minute
wait why is he hesitating he didn't
hesitate when he put on his killer spiky
sneakers he didn't hesitate with the
really cool track pants he didn't
hesitate with the nasa t-shirt now he's
hesitating to talk something must be up
so then your brain goes to work to
protect you
it has a million different ways to
protect you one of them is called the
spotlight effect it's a known phenomenon
where your brain magnifies risk why to
pull you away from something that it
perceives to be a problem
and so
you can truly
trace every single problem or complaint
in your life
to silence and hesitation
those are decisions and what i do and
what's changed my life is waking up and
realizing that motivation's garbage i'm
never going to feel like doing the
things that are tough for difficult or
uncertain or scary or new so i need to
stop waiting until i feel like it and
number two
i am one decision away from a totally
different marriage
a totally different life a totally
different job a totally different income
a totally different
relationship with my kids not like one
decision i'm divorcing you
in the marriage example but one decision
on
you know you could be having a
conversation with your spouse and you
feel your emotions rise up and
within
a tiny window those emotions
can take over
and can impact how your marriage goes or
you can learn how to take control of
that micro moment
and make a decision to act in a way that
actually shifts your marriage your life
comes down to your decisions and if you
change your decisions you will change
everything
yeah i mean that that core concept comes
through so powerfully in your book um
which is phenomenal and i would love it
if you would take a second to tell
people the story of how and by the way i
wore the nasa shirt because of the
imagery yeah of course god i was like
falling my glasses off that is i did not
even get that i was going to ask you why
you wore that shirt oh my gosh wow so
do your homework of course mel
absolutely okay so um let me just take
you back so so what what you're talking
about is the five second rule which has
become literally my life's work and it
was all a gigantic mistake
i read up on you too and understand how
quest like
be was born out of misery
the five-second rule
and my
life now and my 20-year marriage and
everything that i'm doing and the
companies that i've built and sold and
the company i'm building now
it all comes back to a point in my life
that completely and utterly blew
i was 41 years old
i was unemployed
my husband had
started a restaurant business which was
his dream this is actually a funny story
when he he got laid off from a big job
in high tech and i think he was really
relieved you know how a lot of us wait
to quit our jobs and then we get laid
off we're like yes
um and he said i'm not gonna look for a
job i'm gonna go into the restaurant
business and i think i said the most
famous lines of our marriage at that
point i looked at him and i said listen
buddy
inspiration is for strangers you get
your butt back to that job and you pay
the mortgage
and um again
micro moment where i'm being a jerk
instead of being a supportive wife but
that's an example of where when he said
he was not going to go get a job but he
was going to start a business
the first thing that was there was fear
right and so fear was making the
decision for me god i love that you can
share that though that's so powerful
well so what happened is he the first
restaurant was a home run and of course
what do you do when things are
successful you grow it you grow really
big and so they decided to raise some
money
and we threw in our home equity line the
kids college savings
they tried to open a second and a third
and at the same point a grocery store
chain encouraged them to go into
wholesale so it basically got way too
big way too fast
and the wheels started to come off and
they came off so badly that the second
restaurant failed
and they held on to it for too long like
a lot of us do it's another trick our
brains play on us called sunk costs when
you throw a ton of time and a ton of
money at something it's really hard to
let go of it and if you haven't done it
in business we all have a relationship
in our past stayed way too long that was
a trick your brain played on you
um so by the time that they closed the
second restaurant it was an 800 000 loss
i don't i mean
that meant our entire home equity line
gone right it meant um
kids call i get just choked up just
thinking about how terrifying it was
and so i found myself at the age of 41
like just feeling like a complete
failure and so did chris
and
to make it worse not only had
we lost all of our savings
but so many friends and family members
had invested and so there was this real
tension between the truth
of what was happening and what you had
to do in public right because it was
public business
shame failure embarrassment and the
liens started to hit the house the phone
started to ring and it was nothing but
collection calls and i just remember
feeling this tremendous shame
and at some point i think we all hit
that moment in life where things just
are not going how you thought they would
go
and and what's amazing about those
moments is we all
respond very differently so my husband
he would spring out of bed
and he would head right out that door
six o'clock in the morning
and he would go meet his partner and
they would go to the bank and they would
dig right in and they would face their
problems head-on and he's also a smart
guy i mean he did not want to be in the
house when yours truly woke up because i
was a raging [__] at that point in our
lives and the reason why is because when
you're scared
and you're afraid and you're jealous and
you're overwhelmed with emotion it is so
much easier to point the finger at other
people that's a decision by the way sure
one you may not be aware that you're
making but you're still making it
so what would happen to me is the exact
opposite is is chris would be gone the
alarm would go off at six o'clock in the
morning
and i would lie there
and i would think about the lien on the
house and i would think about the
bankruptcy that we were facing and i
would think about how much we had fought
the night before
and i would think about the fact that i
was unemployed
and i would
hit the snooze button
i mean why would you get up when your
life is like that
why would you i mean i needed confidence
i needed courage i was so tapped out
and and you know it's in the scheme of
life hitting the snooze button is not
that big of a deal
but here's the thing about life none of
us wake up and say today is the day i
destroy my life
what we do is we
kind of check out because
it feels overwhelming
or we check out because we're afraid or
we check out because we start listening
to self-doubt and then we make these
teeny tiny decisions
all day long and we don't even realize
it
decision to not get up on time a
decision to not eat the right thing a
decision to snap at your kids a decision
to
not speak in a meeting a decision to not
look for a job a decision to not deal
with your finances a decision to not
call your parent like whatever it is
all day long these tiny decisions that
take you so far off track
and then you wake up like i did and you
you look at your life and you think how
the hell did i get here
and more importantly how do you get back
over there
and you have no idea and so i was so
trapped and i know from your story you
felt the same way like you knew that
there was more in store for you but you
couldn't figure out how do you close
that gap how do you find the power
that's in you how do you discover your
greatness how do you solve these
problems it feels so overwhelming when
you can i mean i would go to the grocery
store and and the items would scan
and i would be sitting there readying my
excuse because
there was no way that my check card was
going to clear wow
so um
what i got in this struggle with myself
that a lot of us find ourselves
in and that is
you get trapped in what i call the
knowledge action gap
you know what to do
but you can't seem to make yourself do
it
right
i mean every one of us is one google
search away from a list of instructions
that if you follow any of them
it will change your life
but how do you get out of your head
and stop thinking about what you need to
do and actually do it and in my case
this stuff was pretty easy
get up on time
make breakfast for the kids get them on
the bus
start looking for a job
be nicer to chris
don't drink so much
instead of isolating yourself pick up
the phone and call a friend
get yourself out into the woods and go
for a walk start running again like all
these little things that i was capable
of but i couldn't get out of here
could not get out of here and if if
you're stuck that's the problem the
problem is you're you're in your head
you're thinking
that is the universal problem and it all
starts with this knowledge of what to do
and then you hesitate and you think
about whether or not you feel like doing
it so for a couple months i was i was
really stuck i i would chris would get
up at six i'd hit the snooze and then
i'd hit the snooze and then i hit the
stews the kids would miss the bus and
then every night i'd do the same thing
i'd go in bed have you ever had one of
those nights
probably before you started your company
but it where you go in bed and you're
like all right tom that's it
tomorrow it's the new me
tomorrow
tomorrow i'm gonna get up on time i am
gonna go to the gym
i am gonna look for a job i'm not gonna
drink so much it's gonna be amazing
the new me the future me whoa let's do
this right then you go to bed
and uh you wake up seven hours later and
you're like
i don't feel like you knew me it's the
only that's the stupidest see
motivation's garbage it's never there
when you need it ever
ever ever ever
and so here's what happened to me and
thank you for wearing the nasa t-shirt
of course it's a really stupid story
it's a powerful story so
one night chris had gone to bed
i'd been struggling struggling
struggling we still had all the same
problems
i we stole a lean on the house still
facing bankruptcy still fighting like
crazy i was still
unemployed
he still they still hadn't figured out
like the solution yet for the business
and i was about to turn off the tv and
there on the the tv there was this
rocket launching and i thought oh my
gosh
that is
it
i am gonna launch myself out of bed like
a rocket ship like nasa right here had
launched me out of that bed and i'm
gonna move so fast that i don't think
i'm gonna beat my brain
now here's a really interesting point um
i talk a lot about your instincts and
inner wisdom
and we can get into this a little bit
later but a lot of us talk about the
fact that you have a gut feeling but
what all this research that i've done
for the book and all the speaking that i
do what i've discovered that's
fascinating is actually when you set
goals when you have an intention on
something that you want to change about
your life
your brain helps you what it does is it
opens up a checklist
and then your brain goes to work trying
to remind you yeah of that intention
that you set and it's really important
to develop the skill and i say that word
purposefully the skill of knowing how to
hear that inner wisdom and that
intention kicking in
and leaning into it quickly so for me my
brain saying that's it right there
move as fast as a rocket mill
i wanted to change my life
and i think most people that are
miserable
or that are that are really like dying
to be great and dying to have more we
want to change we want to
live a better life we want to create
more for our families we want to be
happier
the the desire is there
again it's about how do you go from
knowledge to action so the first thing
in the story that's important is
realizing that the answer was in me
and my mind was telling me pay attention
it could have also been the bourbon
manhattans that night
anyway the next morning the alarm goes
off and um
i pretended nasa was there it's the
stupidest story i literally went five
four three two one i counted out loud
and then i stood up
and i i'll never forget standing there
in my bedroom it was dark
it was cold it was winter in boston
and for the first time in three months
i had beaten my habit
of hitting the snooze button
i couldn't believe it and i thought wait
a minute
counting backwards that is the dumbest
thing i've ever heard in my entire life
well the next morning i used it again
and it worked the next morning i used it
again and it worked the next morning i
used it again and it worked and then i
started to notice something really
interesting
there were moments all day long
all day long
just like that five second moment in bed
where i knew knowledge
what i should do
and if i didn't move within five seconds
my brain would step in and talk me out
of it
every human being has a five second
window might even be shorter
for you
you have about a five second window in
which you can move from idea to action
before your brain kicks into full gear
and sabotages
any change in behavior
because remember your brain is wired to
stop you from doing things that are
uncomfortable or uncertain or scary
it's your job to learn how to move from
those ideas that could change everything
into acting on them in the smallest
moment alright my friend i have a big
announcement my incredible and talented
wife lisa is about to launch her new
book radical confidence in it she has
managed to perfectly capture the process
of how to go from feeling lost and
insecure to taking control of your life
and doing amazing things despite feeling
fear sometimes a lot of fear now let me
tell you nobody knows lisa better than
me but when i read radical confidence
for the first time and heard her
describe what it was like for her to go
from having these big exciting dreams as
a kid to then as an adult scheduling her
life around the tv shows that she wanted
to watch or how lonely and isolated she
felt instead of pursuing her dreams it
was brutal for me i would never say
though that it was worth it for her to
go through all of that just so that she
could write something down that allows
others to avoid it but i will say that
at least she was able to capture the
strategies that she used to break out of
that rut find her voice and begin doing
incredible things despite her
insecurities and fears that she wasn't
going to be good enough to achieve great
things order your copy today because if
you act now you can claim the bonuses
that lisa has created for you at
radicalconfidence.com then once you've
done that we'll get back to today's
episode all right guys read the book and
get ready to be the hero of your own
life peace out
and for anyone right now at home who's
thinking like this sounds too simple too
easy
talk a bit about your community because
reading some of their comments it is
it's crazy how many people like the
sheer volume of people you quote in your
book but if you also go online and just
look at the people that are like
directly reaching out to you it it is an
avalanche of people that have stories
around the five second rule well one of
the reasons why i'm so excited about
this book and look you don't have to buy
the book this is an idea that you can
use it's free it's backed by science
more than eight million people around
the world have discovered it and you
know you're talking about the number of
people we've heard from more than a
hundred thousand people in 80 countries
that are using this rule we know of 11
people who have stopped themselves from
killing themselves using this right i
saw one of those yes
yes there's a guy steve that wrote to us
who was a veteran he was suffering from
post-traumatic stress disorder he
boarded a ferry overseas with the
intention to jump over
he walked over to the railing
and his inner wisdom
kicked in
in that moment
the five-second rule 5-4-3-2-1 counting
backwards moved away from the railing
asked for help saved his life
his story has inspired countless other
people that have heard me in the
speeches that i give around the world
about this one tool and so you know the
thing the thing that's so cool about
this and i should tell you the science
behind it because i'm going to be honest
with you it is stupid had i ever thought
that i would find myself eight years
after discovering it
spending my days telling people about
the five second rule first of all i
would have picked a different name
because it reminds me of the one where
you have to like pick up food within
five seconds off the floor right
um
it was my secret weapon
this was something i did i never
intended to tell anybody because i went
from getting up on time and waking up on
time to shaking up my entire life
because when you understand the power of
a five-second decision and you
understand that you always have a choice
to go from autopilot to decision maker
everything in your life will change you
will be a different negotiator you will
be different sales you will be
unstoppable in the gym because you will
realize the amount of garbage that you
put in the way of your hopes of your
dreams of your potential of your
confidence of your courage
everything comes down to the decisions
that you make
we all know what to do
none of us know how to make ourselves do
it so um
i started researching it why does
something so stupid work
why why does something so silly create
such powerful and profound change well
here's why
the rule is a form of metacognition
metacognition is a fancy pants terms
that means something real simple
you can outsmart your own brain in
furtherance of goals
they're tricks that you can use that
actually outsmart the tricks your brain
plays on you
in furtherance of a higher purpose we
all know this you can you can
restrain yourself
if uh you're in a situation that calls
for it you can jump into a raging river
to save your dog or your kid
you can direct yourself in ways
if it's important to you and so the rule
what it does is it does something really
remarkable
when you count backwards five four three
two one
what you're actually doing
is you're interrupting what researchers
call habit loops that get encoded as as
closed loop patterns in your basal
ganglia that's the part of the brain
where your feelings where your emotions
every habit that you have which is
nothing more than behavior that you
repeat that you don't even think about
i've heard it referred to as a gearbox
yeah to shift your attention from yes
and so when you go five four three two
one it interrupts what's going on here
that's spinning without you thinking and
it moves and awakens
your prefrontal cortex
so when you hit one
your habit has been interrupted so
you've interrupted self-doubt you've
interrupted maybe snapping at your kids
you've interrupted the desire to grab
for a drink you've interrupted uh
procrastination
you've also by counting backwards
done an action
it's awakened your prefrontal cortex
that is the part of the brain that you
need that's awake
when you're changing behavior when
you're learning new things when you hit
one it's also a prompt
so in the language of research uh you'll
hear people talk about um starting
rituals
that is that is something that's proven
to help you learn a new habit the five
second rule when you repeat it becomes a
starting ritual that triggers you to act
with confidence that triggers you that
this is a moment for courage that
triggers you to shift gears and because
you've also done the manual work of
awakening the part of the brain that you
need to change
you've set yourself up for success it
doesn't work if you count up because you
can keep going
and also counting up doesn't require
focus
if you count backwards five four three
two one
it again awakens the prefrontal cortex
and it prompts you to move
when you start to use it and then you
read about it you'll see that that it's
being used all over the place they use
it in the armed services in order to
align troops and get them to start an
exercise they use it at elementary
schools 54321 at big assemblies to get a
huge room full of kids stop talking
simple and interesting example yeah
because it requires you to focus
it's not a habit it will become a habit
that prompts you to have confidence and
courage but in the beginning it
interrupts patterns of behavior that you
do on autopilot
it helps you assert control and it
teaches you how to become the kind of
person that moves from thinking about
something to actually doing it it's
incredible so there's so many things in
that story and guys i'm telling you it's
um
you're gonna love the depth of brain
research that is put in the book it's
really quite extraordinary you really
have an amazing grasp of the brain and
it really really came through in the
book and for me it was a wonderful
balancing act between the just raw
emotion of the people writing in and
some of the stories that you're sharing
and you know the imagery of the rocket
ship which you know i mean you're
you're very open about it's sort of a
silly visual metaphor but because it's
effective that silliness is somewhat
irrelevant what's incredible is in five
seconds flat self-doubt can take over
and rob you
of your power and rob you of joy and rob
you of of your potential or
in five seconds flat
you can actually use one stupid little
trick
to push yourself to grab it
what i loved in the book is because you
paint the picture so very well you're
also just a good writer so you paint the
pictures like i could feel the crisp you
know winter air of boston like stalking
you out of the you know the under the
comforter and so i could really feel it
i was there with you you know as as
chris's business is struggling and so
you really feel all of that and so the
moment when you do the countdown you
spring out of bed and you're almost like
taking yourself by surprise and you're
like moving before you realize it and
then but you're reading it from the
perspective of i already knew who you
were
so it was that giving me the chills it
was
more
difficult to picture you as stuck than
it was to know i know where she goes
right i'd already seen the ted talk by
the time i read the book i knew what you
were doing from a media perspective i
knew how many people and companies you'd
helped so for me it was like watching it
in reverse
so i'm watching it from the safety of i
know she crushes it so if this is the
thing and i love that this isn't your
first book like this was the secret that
you planned to like keep hidden in the
drawer forever oh yeah i was not going
to tell anybody because it was stupid
and it also works and so it's my thing
it's not your thing and but see the real
thing that happened for me and this is
this is something that that um
is a really important topic for me is
that
there's a there's when you talk about
personality so extroverts introverts a
lot of us
really i know i did this i was all wrong
about what confidence meant
i thought confidence was a personality
trait i love this tell me more i thought
that people that are outgoing are the
confident ones right
and the truth is
confidence is not a personality trait at
all
it's a skill
and a lot of the extroverted people that
you know are actually very insecure
i used to be one of them
i used to be the kind of bossy crass
loudmouth that didn't believe in myself
that didn't believe in my ideas that
didn't have the confidence and the
courage to really
be the real me
who i am who i'm not flaws and all
there are tremendous number of
introverted people
that feel uncomfortable
uh putting the attention on themselves
but they're very very confident in their
ideas
they definitely believe in themselves
and so when you start to separate
confidence not as a matter of
personality
but as a skill that you can acquire
because confidence is the ability to
move in my opinion from thought to
action
because when you're a confident person
you believe enough in yourself and your
capabilities that you're willing to try
that you're willing to share to me
confidence isn't the assuredness that it
turns out it's the willingness to try
and and that was a huge insight for me
and and what a lot of people don't know
about me although i share this on stage
and i'm extremely open about this
because this is a a topic that's really
important to me is that
the single most profound use of the five
second rule is mind control
and i say that
as a lawyer
i will tell you you can use this stupid
trick to cure yourself of anxiety yeah i
wanted to talk about that so you
struggled very profoundly with anxiety
so walk us through like some nuts and
bolts of how you use the five second
rule because i think we're so my
hypothesis and the reason we found it
impact theory is that the world is
living through two pandemics the
pandemic of the body which everybody
understands because it's so visual yep
being overweight dying of um diet
related diseases such as diabetes and
things like that but because the second
pandemic the pandemic of the mind is
invisible um people don't realize how
pervasive
a suicide is and i think it's a leading
cause of death among young men i mean
it's crazy
and then that there are ways that they
can go about attacking that and fixing
the problem so yeah walk us through that
sure i would love to um so first of all
i literally have struggled with anxiety
my entire life and anxiety for this
conversation the way i define it is it
is the habit of worrying
spiraled out of control you know you may
say that you are a warrior that's not
true you have a habit of worrying a
habit is a pattern of behavior or
thinking that you repeat without
realizing it
so anxiety happens when that pattern of
worrying about things spirals out of
control and now it starts to marry and
manifest itself with physical sensations
too that's all that it is
i know that i say that's all that it is
me personally i struggled with anxiety i
think my entire life it became quite
acute when i was in my late teens and
early 20s
i became medicated in the middle of law
school i took zoloft for two decades
when our first daughter was born who is
now 17 the postpartum depression
and the cascading panic was so terrible
that not only was i medicated and
couldn't breastfeed but i couldn't be
left alone with her wow so when i say
you can cure yourself of anxiety i don't
say that lightly
four years ago
after i had been using the five-second
rule to change my behavior how i spoke
to my husband how i negotiate in
business meetings how i conduct sales
the kind of parent that i am my health
habits my eating habits curbing the
drinking
um i thought
i wonder if i can use this
five four three two one thing to get
control
of my
thought patterns
not my behavior patterns my thought
patterns
yes you can
so we're gonna we're gonna build this
conversation because i wanna start with
something we can all relate to and that
is how do you stop worrying
and how do you stop listening to
self-doubt
this is how you're going to do it so all
day long
you're going to have moments where your
thoughts drift and i use that word on
purpose because for me there is a
physical sensation when you start to use
the five second rule and you start to
wake up
not only on time in the morning but you
wake up to your life and the
opportunities in your life there's your
thoughts drift like you'll just be
hanging out with your friends and then
suddenly you're like i'm not sure that
that person likes me anymore you know i
haven't heard from my kids lately i
wonder if they're dead or you know oh
you know as a check like you just start
worrying about stuff why because it's a
habit
because when you're not paying attention
your brain shifts from you being a
decision maker and paying attention to
you just kind of spinning things on
autopilot and one of your habits is
worrying
the second you wake up and you notice
holy cow i'm talking some negative
garbage to myself right now
five four three two one
you've just shifted the part of the
brain that you're using you've shifted
from the basal ganglia which is where
your habit loops are spinning and you've
awakened your prefrontal cortex
you've also interrupted that pattern
now what you're going to do because your
mind is actually ready
to receive a different thought because
of the counting
now you can put in an anchor thought
like if you have a mantra if you've got
a vision about the way that your
business is going to turn out in five
years if you just have a thought that
makes you really happy and proud insert
that now why does this work
it works because of the counting
and i'm not kidding
we know based on research the positive
thinking alone not effective
in some instances trying to force
yourself to think positive can actually
make the worries worse
why well the reason why is because it's
really hard to just change the channel
what we have to do first is basically
interrupt it and turn off the tv and
then turn it back on
with the prefrontal cortex awakened so
the counting is essential and so
you can start using this today you catch
yourself
talking garbage to yourself because we
all know if i were to put a speaker on
your head and broadcast if you would be
sitting here in the audience you'd be in
an insane asylum because the crap that
you say to yourself is insane
and the problem is we listen to it
you'll be you'll be in a sales meeting
and you'll be undermining yourself
they're not going to buy oh my gosh i'm
in trouble you're not even present five
four three two one switch it back get
back to that vision that you have about
toasting your success or this customer
being really happy or you being proud of
yourself whatever that vision may be you
can control your thoughts and this is
not just us talking about it this is a
tool that you can use i started to get
back all of the objections that people
had to doing it
and they're [__] sad tom
and this gets to the heart of why i
think so many people are stuck
one of the biggest objections that
people had to
standing in front of the mirror take a
moment look at yourself and then raise
your hand
as people said over and over and over
again
i haven't done anything
worthy
of high-fiving
high-fiving feels like a celebration
i don't have the number on the scale
that i want
i don't like my bank account i don't
enjoy what i do for a living i've made a
shitload of mistakes i'm struggling with
trauma
i don't have anything to celebrate
and what i realized is
people are making a fundamental mistake
you are withholding the very support
empowerment and celebration that you
need to change and to do the hard work
and to face the things that you're
scared of
and that's why you're not changing this
is so interesting so i'm going to push
you on this i'm super curious because
one of the things i love about you is
you're so blunt and honest about hey if
you want to have self-worth you have to
do things you think you're worthy i'm a
huge proponent of that and yet i do
recognize that you have to let yourself
off the hook to really get started so
how do you help people anchor on
something is it just hey it's the
[__] neurochemistry of the situation
you have to do it yeah pretty much
because if you can't stand in front of
the mirror
and raise your hand
and high-five yourself just because you
got your ass out of bed
and you're breathing
you will never get what you want in life
ever there is something in the
resistance to it and if you unpack the
resistance
you will find the reason why you don't
have what you want
you either think you're not worthy of it
or you think that it's kind of stupid or
you have been brought up to believe that
for women in particular you're going to
be [__] or selfish or not likeable if
you're celebrating yourself there is
something in the resistance to you
simply
cheering for yourself so talk to the
person though that so as of right now
they they really believe the world has
shown them that they aren't worthy it's
not like they question it they know it
to be true yeah how do you help people
because i recognize that as a lie or
even if it's true it's useless
but how do you help people
out of that moment
so
the first thing that i would say is how
is
treating yourself as if you're unworthy
helping you
like let's just get strategic and common
sense about it
is the negative [__] you're saying
and the support that you're withholding
helping you feel better
if it's not try this
try celebrating yourself five days in a
row literally try starting your day by
waking up and raising your hand and
high-fiving yourself in the mirror just
because you're breathing
and see what happens
we have a a woman that wrote to us who's
in a domestic violence shelter
she's lost everything she's been in
abusive relationships she has a
tremendous amount of childhood trauma
she is doing the high five habit and
here's what she had to say about it
i have nothing right now
i have a tremendous amount of evidence
from my life that i have [__]
everything up but you know what this
high five habit is showing me i still
have me
i can have my own back
i can be here for myself
the world has told me and convinced me
that i can't but every morning when i
stand here and i stare at myself in the
mirror and i raise my hand in defiance
of all the [__] that's happened to me
i keep going
i am saying i believe in myself
and when you have that small reversal
that small act of defiance and that's
what it is if you're like heavy and
you're eating emotionally or you're
feeding your trauma when you raise your
hand and celebrate yourself even though
you don't like what you look like
it's an act of [__] defiance to all
the stuff that you have survived in your
life and the best part about it you
don't have to [__] say anything
and you know the reason why this is so
important is most mantras are complete
[__]
because you don't believe it you know
it's a there's a he we all know we need
to accept ourselves we all know we need
to love ourselves but how how do you do
it to your point when you have a bunch
of evidence stacked up that you've
failed or reasons that you see that make
you feel like you've blown it or you're
not worthy of it i'll tell you how you
freaking raise your hand and high five
yourself anyway
because beating yourself up will not
make you do the work to get healthy
and tearing yourself down over the [__]
that you've done or the terrible
relationships that you're in it's not
going to empower you to change the
patterns that are keeping you stuck
but raising your hand in an act of
defiance or a [__] you to the past that
you survived and saying i'm still here
which means i still have a shot to
change my life
that is what this means
there's another thing that you talk
about in the book that i think ties to
this really well which is the reticular
activating system the ras
and you have this thing uh which you say
you look for the hearts yes and it's
really an interesting psychological
principle of
you're going to see what you look for
yes and whether that's a red mazda or
whatever you say in the book or whether
that's a heart when you're walking
around whether that's a reason to
love your wife whatever um
if you look for it you're going to find
it and if it's a problem and a reason
that you're you know a dirtbag and a
reason that you're not worthy and all of
that you're going to see them and they
will be there for you and they will
overwhelm you
what is this idea of looking for hearts
what is that how do people use it okay
so i love this tool because obviously
the high five in the mirror it's like a
trojan horse it's the beginning of
building this partnership with yourself
and throughout the book
i then unpack all these other little
tools and habits that you can use that
are in this lane of empowerment support
belief in self the book and i want to
take a second to point this out the book
is rich
with a bunch of other ideas so anybody
that's tempted to say okay well i've
already heard the high five myself and
i'm done you did a really good job of
the and to be honest i'm not even sure i
guess because it was what unlock things
for you in your life but there's like 15
things that you could have titled the
book after yeah um so anyway back to
this so the reticular activity system
the ras for short um for if you don't
know what it is picture a hair net over
your brain that is a live network and
the ras is a filter and it has a huge
job and it is a filter that blocks out
of the world and lets in about you know
point zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero one percent
and it is always changing
there are only four things tom that get
through the hair net on your head the
sound of your name and you've
experienced this because you've been
walking through a crowd and you're like
did somebody say my name
right
party effects cocktail party effect the
second thing that gets through is any
sort of threat so if you hear a loud
noise and you go like this there are
lots of noises you didn't hear but the
loud one you kind of duck because it's a
threat the third thing is when your
partner is interested in sex with either
you or someone else that's why you're
like why are you checking that person
out right you know because the brain is
letting that information in the fourth
thing and this is where the
transformation
begins
your brain will let in anything that it
believes is important to you the
zygarnic effect is
the documented fact that when something
is important to you
and i'll explain what that means
your brain opens up a checklist in your
mind
and now your brain wants it puts this
item on your checklist it will store the
checklist in your subconscious it's
encoded in your ras
and your mind is now on the alert
to spot things related to it the way
that you make yourself feel like
something is important is your nervous
system goes on alert
while you're thinking about it you're
either super excited about something oh
this is super important or this is the
trauma effect you go on alert and you
have something really bad happen which
is why
things continue to bring it up
throughout the rest of your life so when
you understand that if something's
important to you
your filter will change in real time how
you see the [__] world
you now know how to change your brain to
work for you and looking for hearts is
the way i'm going to prove to you that
this happens i want to give you one
other example because everybody's
experienced this if you've ever gone
shopping for a new car or you've dreamt
about having a new car
what happens immediately when you get
excited about that new car is your mind
goes zygon artifact oops okay tom wants
the new bronco
that's cool so what do you see now you
see broncos everywhere now they were
always there
but your mind is letting them in
because the zygon artifact
is now mated on a checklist it's changed
the ras
and so i am going to prove to you
that it is
unbelievably cool that you can change
the way that you view the world by
looking for heart-shaped objects
so tomorrow when you wake up you're
going to start your day by high-fiving
yourself in the mirror i want you to
examine what the resistance about
because you're going to start to then un
be able to unpack what's holding you
back
then you're going to go out in the world
and just like tell your mind i want to
see a heart today look for a rock look
for a leaf look in your like latte is
there a little shape there is there an
oil stain on the floor and when you see
one stop
and go [__]
i i just
like there's a scavenger hunt
i never would have seen that before
thank you brain
now your brain's like
more hearts you will start to see hearts
everywhere
and when you can start to train your
brain and realize whoa
this is actually a cool thing this is
high-fiving your mind
when you can see hearts you can now go
wait a minute if i can change what i see
based on what i tell it
maybe if i got serious about not
constantly saying i'm a failure i
wouldn't attach that or see it
everywhere
maybe if i got serious about saying
i can figure anything out
this is happening for a reason instead
of i'm [__] you say okay i'm gonna
learn something with this
it changes the way your brain filters
everything
and this is such an important piece to
the book because we've all had the
experience where you love somebody
deeply
and you see all their incredible
attributes
and all they see is failure or all they
see is the weight that they can't lose
and it doesn't matter what you say
it doesn't matter what kind of pep talk
or support you give them
your loved one still only sees what they
hate about themselves
blame the filter in your brain you have
been bitching about your appearance or
the weight on your scale the fact that
you're a failure for so long your brain
believes it's important to you to see
reasons why this is true
and one of the things i got to say about
this
and everything in the book is the tools
are simple tom
but it's super important to say
just because you change and start
celebrating yourself it's not going to
make the weight disappear suddenly
it doesn't change the number on the
scale overnight what it changes is you
and that changes your ability
to deal with the problems and the issues
you want to change in your life hello my
friend you know that i believe success
requires you to see failure as the
ultimate learning tool success requires
you to be disciplined and gritty and to
never ever quit on your dreams i say all
of that because one thing is certain the
road to achieving your goal is not
smooth or linear i wish it was but it's
not it's going to be bumpy sometimes
scary some days you'll take two steps
forward and slide 10 steps back and
that's why success also requires you to
know how to pull yourself out of a rut
and get unstuck fast life is short you
can't be messing around with your goals
you've got to make progress every single
day so i've pulled a class from impact
theory university called how to get
unstuck which you can watch for free
with the link on your screen or by
clicking below when you join me for that
free preview of that workshop from
impact theory university i'm going to
teach you my strategy for how to
understand exactly where you need to be
going how to identify the obstacle
that's blocking you and the best way to
make the most progress towards that goal
and keep your momentum right click that
link and let's get to work all right
i'll see you on the inside you have some
really
counter-intuitive ideas
bold stances on things which i found
incredibly interesting one of them is
jealousy
and that not to just reject that stuff
offhand but that there's actually
information carried in those strong
emotions jealousy is one of the most
powerful directional signals on the
planet
because you're only jealous of people
that are doing things or have things
that you actually want it's impossible
to be fake jealous whatever you're
jealous of is hitting something deeply
personal [__] pay attention to it
instead of stewing in it go oh
flip it
that's interesting
i wonder why i'm jealous
what is it about it oh
it's that they're doing it consistently
it's that they've built a team it's that
they've aligned their work together so
that they're spending more time together
huh how could i take those things that
i'm really now really inspired by
and take action and go get them in my
life
because the thing about jealousy is it's
just your inspiration that's blocked
jealousy
is sort of the insecurity
that you have that blocks this
inspiration i guarantee you back to the
uber driver he's jealous of all the
other actors earning oscars
because he's so inspired by the thought
of doing that in his own life but his
insecurity is blocking action his fear
is blocking action so instead of it
being inspiration
it shows up as jealousy and i'm here to
tell you the second you feel jealousy
freaking
stop okay
let's unpack that what exactly is it
about it and now if i were inspired by
it because there's enough success to go
around for everybody
if i can use that as a road map to then
go figure out how i might be able to do
that for myself
wow
talk about a game changer and now let's
add in the high five what if every time
i took a little step i celebrated myself
for just doing it now you're building
small wins and momentum in a direction
that's meant for you that's how you
change your life
if you let it go unchecked
what will happen is you will get used to
worrying
you will get used to living in a state
where you're slightly agitated all the
time
let me talk a little bit about agitation
so what we know based on research is
that physically in your body so
physiologically
being excited
is the exact same thing
as being afraid let me say that again
because it is so important
in your body
being excited is the exact same thing as
being afraid your body doesn't know the
damn difference your heart races your
armpits sweat you're like you know you
may get tight in your throat
you may your cheeks may get pink like my
do when i get excited
the only difference between excitement
and fear is what your brain
says and the problem is if you have a
habit of worrying
guess what you're going to tell yourself
is going on
that you're that you're like freaking
out that you're not excited that
something must be wrong oh gosh why
would you say something's wrong because
you got a habit of saying that all the
time even as i became a speaker for a
living or i'd be on cnn
when i first started doing it i would be
freaking out backstage
but even even though like you know just
a couple just last week he's standing
backstage
about to go on 8 000 people
heart races armpit sweat you know my
hands get clammy i'm not nervous though
not at all i'm excited
and so i developed this technique and
research
out of harvard not based on my technique
but something very similar proves that
if you basically
right before you're about to do
something take a test run a race
public speaking a business negotiation
ask somebody to marry you whatever it
may be that gets your heart racing
just do this go i'm excited
i'm excited to give that speech i'm
excited to ask him or her i'm excited to
do this race i'm excited because what
happens is you give your brain context
so your brain doesn't escalate the stuff
going on in your body your brain's not
worried
makes sense
so you can combine this with a five
second rule so we know how to do
worrying you you catch your thoughts
drift 54321 anchor thought if you start
to feel your heart racing five four
three two one to awaken the prefrontal
cortex and then start going i'm really
excited to do this i'm really excited to
do this another technique that you can
use is ask
um
i think they call it interrogat
interrogatory questions where instead of
giving yourself a pep talk say well why
am i ready to do this
why am i ready because that'll force you
to answer the question which then
convinces you so why am i ready to close
the sale why am i ready to give this
speech why am i ready so those are two
strategies that you can use back by
science that are proven to actually make
your performance
be much better now let's take it a step
further to anxiety
so
anxiety is what happens when the habit
of worrying spins out of control
your body gets really agitated and then
you allow your mind to escalate it into
a full-blown panic attack
so for those of you that have not had
the pleasure of having a panic attack
let me um explain what it's like
so have you ever been in your car and
you're driving down the road and you go
to change lanes and all of a sudden
there's like oh my god there's a car
right there yeah right
and you swerve a little bit and then
your heart's like
and you may sweat a little bit and and
you grip the wheel really tight and
you're super locked in on on the road
ahead of you
but then that car pulls away and the the
the near-miss scenario passes and your
mind starts going okay you're all right
now right you're all right now that's it
that's all that's what a panic attack is
only it happens while you're standing in
front of your coffee pot
seriously you have that same oh my god
what about that
and your heart's racing and and the
problem for your brain
is that your brain can't look around and
say holy cow we almost got hit by a car
right
your brain's saying what the hell is
wrong with her she's making coffee and
she's freaking out and so now your brain
is a problem because what's your brain's
job it's designed to protect you
[Music]
so your brain will now do whatever it
can
to magnify the problem remember we
talked about the spotlight effect
it'll start telling you all kinds of
crazy stuff because it can't figure out
contextually what the hell's going on
she's just making coffee now her heart
is ra racing and she's breathing really
holy cow maybe she is having a heart
attack a lot of people that have panic
attacks say i think i'm dying oh my god
what's up what's happening or you'll see
them do the deer in the headlights thing
where they got to get out of the room
that is the spotlight effect in your
brain
now taking control and magnifying
everything to get you out of whatever it
was
so here's how you use the five second
rule
you use it to stabilize your thoughts
before the panic escalates
and then what happens is it drifts into
worry and then it disappears right
so the second you feel worry you catch
it you train yourself to do that if you
start feeling yourself getting you know
your heart racing you can five four
three two one and use the i'm excited
i'm excited
um
if you if that doesn't work
literally five four three two one
and just give yourself an anchor thought
literally of you being okay
i'll give you another quick example
because this is one that we have a
tremendous number of success with and
people that hear the example use it
immediately and are blown away i used to
be terrified of flying terrified every
bump i'd be freaking out and
and so i started using this strategy
with the plane
so the second that you feel yourself
getting nervous five four three two one
and then your anchor thought is a vision
of what you're going to do when you get
to where you're going
so when i get on the plane tomorrow to
fly back to boston i'll think about
walking in the house and the place is
like a disaster it'll look like
everybody's stuff got loaded into a
cannon and fired all over the you know
first floor
and so if we hit turbulence 54321 i'll
think about that vision
because cognitively for my brain
if i'm walking in the house and it's a
disaster the plane made it
that's the power of this it's incredible
incredible what i love about email is
that a i love how raw and real you are
about your own situation which because
people are going to look at you and the
first thing they're going to want to do
is make you extraordinary as a way not
to have to like live up to your standard
because what you've accomplished really
is astonishing and seeing you on stage
is unbelievable
unbelievable you're so good at that and
i know that it comes from working your
ass off but wow it's very very
impressive thank you but then that you
use techniques like that you've got
answers for you know how
have i done this i've done it like this
and i've had guests sit across from me
that that's not their stick right like
they have done truly extraordinary
things with their life but they seem
just like totally blind to how they did
it
and the fact that you can walk people
through it is so cool well i think we're
all flawed
and that's the beauty of who you are
and instead of trying to make yourself
perfect in every area it's so much
easier when you accept the things that
you're terrible at or that are your
weaknesses or that are the things about
your wiring look if i were diabetic i
would take insulin
i happen to be somebody that's wired for
anxiety no big deal so figure out how to
instead of fighting those things
actually
trick it
because the truth is that you're never
going to feel ready to make these
changes you're never going to feel like
doing them but you can always make a
decision that's always in your control
staying with somebody that treats you
like garbage is a decision
it is
staying at a job that you hate is a
decision
staying in the body that you are not
proud of is a decision is it going to be
easy no it's not going to be easy to
change it's simple
do a google search and then use a five
second rule to force yourself to do that
stuff
change comes down to five second
decisions and this is why the five
second rule is is important for
everybody to know
it's your job to push yourself
and i don't care if you're dr martin
luther king jr or your michelangelo or
your lin-manuel miranda who wrote
hamilton you will struggle with
self-doubt
and everybody that you admire everybody
and the list is the same priority oh
oprah winfrey and i want to be like you
know tom and i want to be like uh you
know
branson and i want to be like jay-z and
i want like everybody's listeners bill
gates and do you know what those people
do
they do not have the habit of hesitating
they trust themselves all right really
fast before we go tell us about the
million-dollar mornings and settings oh
yes i have a i have a gift so here's the
thing
um
i did one thing other than the
five-second rule that has changed my
life my marriage everything i do not
have the phone in my bedroom
the phone is designed by people like
your phone you should not have your
phone in your bedroom and here's why
because what's on your phone is not your
dreams what's on your phone is stuff
that's been designed by people that
study game theory you know why you check
your email all the time all the time you
know you're constantly looking at your
phone
it's called random rewards it's a
psychological principle that explains
why we pull slot machines because every
six or seven times we get a little
random reward so we keep going back i
know most emails blow but every once in
a while you get a good one that's why
you keep looking right
so um i created this course called the
million dollar morning whether you want
to make a million dollars
a year or in the morning or whether you
want to wake up and feel like a million
bucks this is the science-backed
strategy step by step by step
for how to wake up because it's not when
you wake up that's matters it's how you
wake up that matters
and we filmed it at the house
i walk you through all the science i
show you
the whole routine and we're giving it to
your audience for free wow
thank you you're welcome because look i
want you to use these things it's one
thing to talk talk talk and think it's
another thing to actually take action
and the more that that you can provide
that i can provide that shows people
what to do and the more tools that we
can give people
to get out of their heads and into
action
the more the world is going to improve
the more your life will improve
getting people to understand
neurochemistry is the game and once you
understand the game that you're playing
then you can play it well but if you
don't understand the game then you're
going to get stuck and you're going to
be stuck forever
and you talk a lot about taking
responsibility for that recognizing
nobody's coming to save you something
you said in the book it's something that
you've said in interviews something that
i absolutely think is really powerful
how do we use that why is that important
to recognize
well it's important to recognize because
first of all nobody is coming
[Laughter]
mean if you've been sitting around
waiting for somebody to discover you to
pick you to save you to rescue to give
you your shot it's not [__] happening
like at some point you got to wake up
and realize when you're 18 and you're
out of that house
you have to parent yourself
your life is your responsibility and as
a woman one of the things that i found
to be
extraordinarily transformational is when
i stopped in a very traditional sense
looking to my partner to be responsible
for providing
for me
providing financially providing the
support providing when i realized
wait a minute it starts with me
i have to be
able to figure out how to make myself
happy that's by the way the secret to a
happy relationship marry somebody who's
happy and work on your own happiness
preach
and so when you stop outsourcing
your happiness your validation your
support all of it and you bring it back
in
and you get responsible for it it sounds
scary it's so
liberating because you could do anything
when you're responsible when you're the
driver of your life when you're not
looking out to anybody else to fix it
for you can you ask for help of course
but the buck stops with you
you're the one that has to do the work
you're the one who has to push your own
ass you're the one who has to figure out
what makes you happy you're the one who
has to figure out and become self-aware
about what you need and then you're the
one that has to
find whatever it is the courage or being
humble enough to ask for help
even if it's asking for help
from the biggest ally that you have
which is the person staring back at you
in the mirror every damn
yeah i don't know why people aren't more
obsessed with their goals it's like
if my goals demand that i ask for help
then i'm going to ask for help like i'm
not even going to let anything else get
in the way i'm just so obsessed with if
my goal is exciting and honorable
then i should actually want to achieve
it and therefore whatever it is that i
need to do so tom this is why
and this comes back to what makes has
made me really sad and
deeply moved by the kinds of things that
people are sharing
most people aren't obsessed with their
goals because they don't believe they're
worthy of them
it's easy to dream about what you want
but in between where you are and what
you want
there's a tremendous amount of stuff you
gotta change and do
and if you have
a lot of trauma in your background or
you were raised by somebody who beat the
[__] out of you or told you were a piece
of [__] or if you've had to deal with
microaggressions or racist
discriminatory systematic crap your
entire life you have been given the
message over and over and over even
though it's not true
that you don't deserve it that there's
something wrong with you and if you
don't
at some point
be defiant against what the world or
your caregivers or your past experience
has pounded into your brain incorrectly
unfairly
you will forever be stuck with that
story
you are not responsible for what
happened to you
you survived what happened to you
but you do have a responsibility to heal
yourself and to do the work to change so
that you can be the happy fulfilled
person that you were born to be
yeah that's really powerful because it's
the only thing that works and you know
thinking about
so many people have just immense things
that have happened that have been unfair
and as you said they didn't do anything
to deserve it but now what
now you're there you've got the trauma
and no one can heal it for you it's
there's a name for it i think it's
called the pedestrian problem it's like
imagine that you get hit by a car and
the driver was drunk and
let's say that the driver was bill gates
and let's say that
you win a settlement
but if
the damage that happened to your body
can't be fixed
with all the money in the world and you
just have to do physical therapy then
it's like even though it is unfair that
you have to do the physical therapy you
there is no amount of money that you can
throw at it that will stop you from
having to suffer to build yourself back
up and i think a lot of people either
fall prey to trap number one which is
they don't think they're worthy or they
fall prey to trap number two which is
it's so unfair they just don't take
action right but they're nonetheless in
the situation that they're in and if the
whole punch line to life is
neurochemistry and feeling joyful and
you know being um excited about who you
are when you're by yourself then it's
like well you have to do the work even
if it isn't fair and that time
especially if it isn't
because there's two
kinds of prisons that you can sentence
yourself to or be sentenced to right one
is all the physical [__] you're talking
about the circumstances of your life the
circumstances of your body the
circumstances that are unfair
and then there is the mental prison and
that's the one you're in control of
so people can do all kinds of [__] to
you
and you can be born into situations that
are not uh
fair they're not safe they're cruel
it's unfair you didn't deserve it
but the real power that you always have
is
how you react to it mentally i'm not
saying put lipstick on a pig and ignore
the very real problems you're saying
you're facing
i'm saying
it begins with your mental attitude
about your own ability to face it
and to
survive it and to move past it
that's what i'm saying
because without that like let's go back
to the woman in the domestic violence
shelter who's had the [__] beaten out of
her by partners who has immense
emotional trauma stored in her nervous
system stored in the neurochemistry of
her brain she has a extraordinary
amount of hurdles to get through in her
life to heal to be safe to break
patterns that are associated with the
trauma that she's experienced as a child
the trauma that she experienced in
romantic relationships the physical
abuse she has issues related to poverty
can a human being
survive those things and change of
course they
can it begins though
with the belief that you can
and so when i come back to this moment
every single morning
you can have nothing
and you can still have your own back
you can have tremendous
problems and very real obstacles that
you're facing
and you can have a mindset that says
through my efforts
my attitude
i can have an impact
on the situation that i'm in
that's the power that i have
i can ask for help because i believe i
deserve it
i can seek
therapy because i believe i should heal
because i deserve that
i can seek information from shows like
impact theory about how to break trauma
patterns about how to regulate my
nervous system because i believe i am
worthy of that when i raise my hand in
the mirror i'm basically saying
[__] off to these people that hurt me
because i believe that i deserve better
that's where it begins begins with you
self-confidence self-love
self-esteem
self-reliance
self-awareness it all has the same self
you have to
give yourself
those things you want validation give it
to yourself you want to be cheered for
give it to yourself you want to feel
supported in life
start by giving those things to yourself
because
the most important relationship that you
have
is the one you have with yourself and
you work on it the least
it's the foundation of every
relationship you have
and
so i believe that there are simple
things you can do from looking at hearts
which doesn't solve your problems it
proves to you that it's possible to
change the way your brain works
that's why i want you to do it it's not
gonna take away poverty it's not gonna
make you lose a hundred pounds it's
gonna prove to you that [__] you do
have power
over the way your mind works
and when you get crafty about training
your brain you can do really cool [__]
and when your attitude is optimistic
based on research we know that you will
work harder and keep going because you
believe that it makes a difference
it begins with these simple things
speaking of tricks that you can do to
get control of your mind in the book you
talk about what i'll call a pattern
interrupt
forget the exact phrase you use for it
but you talk a lot about i'm not going
to think about that i'm not thinking
about that
what does that mean how do you do it why
is it useful
so it's very it's what i started doing
before the five second rule 54321
because you can count backwards do the
same thing
but
a lot of times it's the pattern of
negative thoughts i'm fat i'm this i'm
that i'm the other thing i'm not good
enough i'm not smart enough
or even just worrying what if the delta
variant takes off what if i don't go
back to work what if this happens what
if that how is that helping you exactly
like there's productive worry which is
worry that motivates you to take action
and then there's destructive worry which
is worry that makes you literally circle
the drain mentally
you always want to interrupt destructive
worry or any kind of destructive
self-talk so the second you catch
yourself going gosh i look fatter boy
i'm a loser there i go i failed again
you're like literally
slap that [__] away like high-five it
away i'm not thinking about that
i'm not thinking about that
i'm not thinking about that and you
start with i'm not thinking about that
because if you're so used to hearing i'm
not good enough there's no [__] way
you're going to believe the mantra i'm
good enough
because the thing about mantras are and
this is why most mantras are [__] is
they don't work unless you believe them
and so there is power in creating what's
called a meaningful mantra
but the first step to getting control of
the negative self-talk is interrupt that
[__] don't listen to it i'm not thinking
about that i'm not thinking about that
and then what i want you to do so do
that for a day i'm not thinking about
that i'm not thinking about that if you
have any kind of thought that makes you
feel bad that you don't i'm not thinking
about that
the next day start to notice
what are the patterns in terms of the
thoughts that come up
you know when i was writing this book
one of my daughters talked about the
fact that she's constantly feeling like
she's not a good person
and so for example she missed a dentist
appointment and because she's constantly
thinking i'm not a good person
missing the dentist appointment becomes
evidence see there i am again i miss the
dentist appointment i'm not a good
person
no are you kidding
like if somebody doesn't have the story
if somebody has a different story like
i'm a i'm a pretty good person i do my
best and you miss the dentist
appointment a lot of us are like oh
thank god i can't stand the tennis you
know i'll pay the i'll pay the 20 fee i
don't have to go you don't attach i'm a
shitty person to it
and so
she started using i'm not thinking about
that
she's not ready to believe she's a good
person yet
because she's so used to saying i'm not
a good person
so the first step is interrupt the thing
then take notice
and then you can start to create what i
call a meaningful mantra because now we
want to break the pattern by saying i'm
not thinking about that or use the five
second rule five four three two one and
then when you're ready you can create a
meaningful mantra to replace it because
any pattern
is going to repeat unless you replace it
and so meaningful mantras are things
that you can be like yeah i can believe
that so it might be
ah i'm not perfect but i'm trying ah i'm
not perfect but i'm doing my best
ah you know i screw up sometimes
uh but i'm not a bad person you know
like those kind of things that are sort
of not like yeah superhero mantra i'm
fabulous like most of us don't really
feel that way about ourselves
so if you just are like i'm doing the
best i can
that's pretty empowering if you think
about it or i can i can learn i i can
learn from this
or this is temporary i'll be okay
those sorts of things are little ways to
high-five your mind instead of again
going low you got a choice do you take
yourself down
or do you lift yourself up
are you going outside of yourself
or are you coming back in for what you
need
i want you to come in
and lift yourself up
that's what the high five habit's about
as somebody who has gotten into
countless ubers and some small
percentage of them know who i am and
then of course they start asking
questions
talk to me about chasing your dreams and
this quote that you have that an aha
moment does not necessarily lead to an
aha life
um
yeah the uber driver in dallas that's in
this book um
i get choked up when i think about him
uh an aha moment i'm choked up
i get choked up
because
what happens for me every single day
is and you hear from people every single
day
you've got millions and millions of
people that
are inspired by empowered by impacted by
your content
there are people out there that
use your work as a lifeline
and it is humbling
and what i am
really present to
in the work that i'm putting out in the
stuff that i'm sharing whether it's my
failures or the things that i'm using
that are helping me and my own struggles
is just
how much people are holding themselves
back
and how
much pain people feel
because most folks know
what they dream about
and what they want
and yet
they're spending all of their time and
energy arguing against
what they want
and so you can have all these epiphanies
i hope that when somebody listens to our
conversation and watches this that they
have a massive aha moment but it's not
going to mean [__] [__]
if you don't take action and do
something about it
the aha moment is the door that opens
but your new life does not begin unless
you [__] step through the door
and most people and that's what was
so kind of
you know the simple idea of high-fiving
yourself of encouraging yourself of
supporting yourself most people when you
have an aha moment and the door to your
new life opens up
instead of going i got this let's go and
high-fiving yourself to step forward
most of us go
i don't know if i'm worth that i don't
know if right now is the right time to
do this i don't think i'm good enough
i've failed so many times i can't go
through that door
and that's the problem i want to attack
right now
that there is somewhere in your life
that you know what you want
you can feel it pulling you and you are
actively arguing against it you're
bringing yourself down you're beating
yourself out like people will cheer for
you and me they won't cheer for
themselves
i'm the same way
and so
this uber driver
the story that you're talking about i
get into the car
and
we start driving and i'm on the phone as
we're driving and i'm having a
conversation with somebody about this
daytime talk show that i launched which
was a dream with sony pictures
television and then uh was promptly
fired after season one it was a huge
[__] failure because we didn't make
it to season two
huge failure in real world terms massive
success when it comes to the timeline of
my life
and so i'm talking to this person about
the talk show i hang up the phone and
this uber driver comes alive he's like
oh my gosh i can't believe you're in my
cab
and i'm like why and he says because i
want to talk to you about something i
think you can help me and i'm like great
how can i help you and he says i have a
dream of being a oscar-winning uh actor
and creating opportunities for other
black and latino men to do the same in
acting and i'm like freaking fantastic
what the [__] are you doing in dallas
right yeah the guy's 25 and so
i i go you know the game is in new york
and la i mean sure you can act you can
write stuff you can be here in dallas
but why are you not in la why are you
not in new york and he's like you're
right you're right you're right i need
to move to la like why not
and he says i have seven hundred dollars
in my bank account and i'm like that's
freaking fantastic you have seven
hundred dollars in a car
dude drop me off and get driving what
are you waiting for and so we have this
whole conversation and i write about it
in this book
where
i am actively arguing for his dream and
he is actively arguing against his dream
and
what is so sad
is throughout this conversation tom he's
like you're right 700 could get me there
you're right i am only 25. you're right
if i keep thinking and thinking and
thinking and thinking about what i want
to be doing i'm not only going to drive
in circles my whole life is going to
spin in circles as i think about what i
want and i don't do [__] about it
and then you are going to find yourself
not at 25 but at 45 or 65 and you're
going to be so filled with regret that
you never [__] put a put a bet on
yourself
and so
this conversation ends with him
declaring that he's going to go to
california and me giving him a bunch of
tools that i talk about in this book
and the point of the story is does he
move or not i don't [__] know
the point of the story is it's so easy
to see what somebody else should do it's
so easy to cheer for somebody else we
all do that right we cheer for our
favorite sports teams we follow our
favorite influencers and authors we plan
birthday parties for our friends we take
on extra work from our colleagues we
support everyone around us
we do not know how to do it for
ourselves
yeah it's it's really an interesting
trick of the mind and
like you i have this similar sense of i
want to be able to want it for people
yeah and the one thing in my life that i
am very grateful for is that i know how
to build desire i know how to go down
the process of wanting something what
what is that process for you of desire
because most what i've found in this
book
is here's the thing for most people and
i'm hoping that your process will attack
this what i've discovered that is
heartbreaking
is the average person
cannot
celebrate themselves cannot i'm gonna
ask everybody who's watching this to
tomorrow morning stand in front of the
mirror we're gonna unpack this whole
thing and try to high five yourself
and most really fast give people the the
science behind why that's meaningful so
i have this habit of every single
morning i stand in front of the mirror
and i take a moment and i raise my hand
and i give my reflection a high five and
there is so much science behind this so
instead of seeing yourself
right and have having this moment in the
mirror you know what the average person
does first of all we beat ourselves down
so i would look in the mirror for 40
some years and be like oh my god my
freaking jowls look like saddlebags on a
goddamn horse going in the grand canyon
my eyes have my neck is only striped my
boob one boob's hanging lower than the
other i look like [__] my gray hair like
i start bringing myself down and when
you start going down that road with your
reflection
then your thoughts go to i didn't get to
that email i forgot to text lisa back i
oh my gosh the dog still needs to be
walked i've got nine minutes for my
first zoom you're now checking out
and that moment in the mirror every
morning
could be a profound moment
where you lift yourself up
and you check back in with your
intention
so the first piece of research and this
is recent from harvard business school
is that a simple moment
in the morning
where you set an intention
about who you're going to be today
impacts productivity
how you show up as a leader
it impacts your confidence it impacts
your mood all day long just that simple
moment of setting an intention so that's
research number one instead of
standing in front of the sink in your
bathroom and criticizing your appearance
or mindlessly going on autopilot
check back in and let's teach you to
make it a habit to lift yourself back up
i hope you guys enjoyed this episode
brought to you by our sponsors at
athletic greens to receive a free
one-year supply of vitamin d and five
free travel packs with your first
purchase visit
athleticgreens.com
impact theory enjoy the episode
second piece of research and this comes
from a whole field of study called
neurobics neurobics is like aerobics for
your mind i didn't make this up
this is
literally you can speed up the
development of new neural pathways by
marrying physical activity
with a change in thought
and so traditionally i know you've
covered this on your show if you for
example were to brush your teeth i'm a
right-hander if you were to brush it
with your other hand
and think
a new thought
the fact that your brain is focusing on
brushing with your non-dominant hand
activates more focus on the new thought
it accelerates the learning so you take
neurobics a physical activity with a
different thought and let me let's talk
about a high five for example
what does a high five mean to you
that somebody did something awesome or i
did something awesome correct and if you
think about the times in your life when
you've gotten a high five
it's because somebody's like tom you're
amazing tom
get your attitude out of the can you got
this tom you're gonna make this shot tom
we can still win i believe in you keep
going
you have a lifetime positive association
with giving other people high fives
stored right here in your subconscious
mind when you raise your hand to your
own reflection it is impossible for you
to think god i look fat
why am i an [__] i really screwed up
my life you can't do it because your
lifetime association with this motion is
all i believe in you i got you i see you
i celebrate you and so you in the moment
of doing it override decades of negative
self-talk it's incredible
now have you ever gotten a high five
where somebody misses the hand or it's
sort of like it sucks right
yeah what do you do when that happens i
redo it correct
that's because a high five requires you
to be present and there is an intention
behind it
so you can't raise your hand to your own
reflection without now grounding
yourself in the moment that's just the
beginning of the research i can go on
about the nba
that was my favorite part hearing about
the nba like even now it's giving me
chills like and especially because we're
recording this still as everybody
thought we were getting out of the
pandemic and now we've got the the
variant
now even i'm starting to worry about the
lack of physical contact and just like
this the the cues that we give each
other through touch like that so yeah
this was one of my favorite parts of the
book yeah
i love this research too because you
know what happened with the high five is
look i did this on a low moment for
myself
like so my brand of self-help is mel's
life is kind of [__] up at the moment
and she can't figure out how to help
herself so she stumbles by accident on
something really stupid on its face
and it feels good
and then i share it with my audience and
if they pick up on it and they then i'm
like okay we're on to something so for
me the high five tom began i'm fired
from my talk show my book contract is
canceled every speech has been canceled
my kids are now home so we've got three
kids 22 20
age 15 all in varying states of distress
i am triggered because my origin story
as you know from being on the show and
us being friends the five second rule
was 12 years ago losing everything and
so i'm now having this feeling like i'm
about to lose everything and i'm also
feeling like i'm losing grip on reality
as the pandemic is hitting and as my
kids are in distress and i don't know
what to do just like everybody on the
planet i find myself in my bathroom one
morning in my underwear
and i am having
this spiral of negative thoughts i look
like [__]
i don't know how to fix this
i wish somebody would solve this for me
i feel overwhelmed i feel scared about
my parents health i feel scared about
everybody on the front lines and even
though i'm literally like you
somebody that empowers other people i
didn't know what the [__] to say to
myself
and as pathetic as it sounds i found
myself just raising my hand
just in a way to basically be like
shut up mel come on girl you like put
your shoulders back lift your you you
got this
you can do this
and something shifted and i went on with
my day and then the next morning i walk
into my bathroom and this is the other
weird thing about the high five i've
literally either criticized myself or
ignored myself in the mirror
for decades
when you start to have a moment with
yourself
the crazy part is you start to build a
partnership with yourself that's
interesting
like you know when you are pulling out
of your driveway or you're walking down
the street you see a neighbor and they
greet you
you will start to have that experience
when you create this intentional moment
with yourself in the mirror every
morning
and so
as i started to do this
i thought this is actually
making me feel like the wind is at my
back when i leave the bathroom it's
making me feel just like when you leave
a huddle in sports and you high five or
you're a runner running a race or doing
some big endurance challenge and some
spectator high-fives you or another
racers like come on you got this as
you're dragging down low
it
gives you a little energy
like i think too about this high five a
lot like i know you know you're friends
with david goggins i'm a huge fan of
goggins and so and i know there's a lot
of people that watch this show
especially men that are like this sounds
kind of stupid
this is the equivalent of goggins cookie
jar moment
so we all think like we've all been
raised like tough love hard on myself
[Music]
[__] the research is clear on this
being hard on yourself is not [__]
motivating it's demotivating
and if you already feel like a failure
or you feel a sense of shame or you're
overwhelmed beating yourself up for
where you are does not [__] work
it drives you into the gutter
the most motivating force in the world
on the planet based on research hands
down
is empowerment encouragement support and
celebration and for our entire lives we
have outsourced that to somebody else
the research is very clear so the nba
study they did this big study looking at
nba teams and they could predict in the
study who was going to be in the
championship rounds
based on in the preseason what teams had
the most fives fist bumps and back paths
why
because those kind of gestures create
partnership and trust and i'm here to
tell you when you start doing it in the
mirror you're creating partnership and
trust with yourself
and so you know one of the things that i
love about this
is that
in a moment when you feel alone
you can give yourself the boost the
support the empowerment that you need
to keep going
and here's another piece of research
that's also like holy cow
you're a big proponent of the growth
mindset you guys talk about it all the
time on the show right so researchers
wanted to know what is the most
empowering way to motivate kids through
a really big challenge okay they divide
the kids into three groups this takes
the marshmallow test to a whole nother
level you got one group of kids that are
doing a challenging task and they're
getting the fixed mindset praise which
we all know does not work oh tom you're
so smart oh tom i love your glasses
that's going to help you oh tom you got
a great smile oh tom you know i i just
love so much about you i know you can do
this so that's one group the second
group gets the growth mindset kind of
phrase tom you are such a hard worker
tom your perseverance is unbelievable
tom you just keep going
that does better obviously than telling
you that you're smart because it makes
you motivated to work hard the third
group
they just got a simple high five the
researchers didn't even say anything to
the kids they just walked up gave them a
high five the group of kids that got a
simple high five outperformed outworked
through all of the challenges all of the
other forms of praise why
because a high five is something deeper
than praise
it fulfills your most fundamental needs
as a human being
when somebody high-fives you you feel
seen
you feel heard
and you feel like somebody has
acknowledged
you for the unique person that you are
let's just talk for a second about the
things that go viral
you can always find going viral
a teacher standing outside of a
classroom doing what greeting kids with
individual handshakes
and we see that we're like oh that's
amazing why
because every one of those kids before
they walk into the classroom feels seen
they feel heard and they feel
acknowledged for the unique individual
that they are our experience um our
conscious experience in this moment and
all of the content that's flooding in
through this experience
is a result of brain processing and if
you change the brain the experience
changes the thoughts change the feelings
change it's
it's it's all correlated